Creating a new AIP-236 for Policy Preview Mode. (#1030)
googleapis/aip: aip/general/0236.md

---
id: 236
state: approved
created: 2023-03-05
updated: 2023-03-05
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 0
---

# Policy Preview

This AIP provides guidance for a rollout safety mechanism to help customers safely make changes to their resources.

> Changes to Policy configurations without proper validation may have unintended consequences which severely impact a customer’s overall infrastructural set up.

Reviewer: "infrastructural" is a bit odd. "...impact a customer's overall infrastructure setup." would sound better. Also, "set up" is a verb and "setup" is a noun. Please fix.

Previews are a rollout safety mechanism for Policy resources which gives the customer the ability to validate the effect of their proposed changes against live production traffic prior to the changes going live.

## Guidance

> ### System Changes

Reviewer: All other AIPs have titles with only the first word capitalized, like,

### System changes

Please fix and throughout.

> The API logic of this mechanism pushes an “experimental” version of a proposed change to the downstream system (data plane) while the existing “effective” version remains active. Both versions of the configuration are subsequently evaluated for incoming traffic, however, only the effective version’s configurations actually have the ability to alter traffic. Meanwhile, the output of the experimental version is logged so a customer can validate that the proposed changes are as intended. This gives the customer the ability to fully understand the effects of the new configuration against live traffic before replacing the effective configuration with it.

Reviewer: This is actually upstream. Downstream is to the client. Please fix

> The API logic of this mechanism pushes an “experimental” version of a proposed change to the downstream system (data plane) while the existing “effective” version remains active. Both versions of the configuration are subsequently evaluated for incoming traffic, however, only the effective version’s configurations actually have the ability to alter traffic. Meanwhile, the output of the experimental version is logged so a customer can validate that the proposed changes are as intended. This gives the customer the ability to fully understand the effects of the new configuration against live traffic before replacing the effective configuration with it.

Reviewer: Line length. Please wrap and throughout, e.g. see,

https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/blob/master/aip/general/0008.md?plain=1

### Non-Goals

#### Non-Policy Resources

This rollout safety mechanism is for policies only.  

> A Policy is a customer-owned resource with a set of rules that govern the behavior of how other resources admit or deny a target entity (e.g. network traffic for firewall rules, general cloud resources with Org Policy). Generally, the outcome of a Policy can be evaluated to a specific set of outcomes, for example, FirewallPolicy evaluates to either ALLOW or DENY for incoming traffic into a Virtual Network. This lends well to preview mode as a rollout safety mechanism as the proposed changes to a Policy can simply be logged instead of enforced.

Reviewer: Remove "cloud", this is not a core AIP, and should not reference, "cloud".

> A Policy is a customer-owned resource with a set of rules that govern the behavior of how other resources admit or deny a target entity (e.g. network traffic for firewall rules, general cloud resources with Org Policy). Generally, the outcome of a Policy can be evaluated to a specific set of outcomes, for example, FirewallPolicy evaluates to either ALLOW or DENY for incoming traffic into a Virtual Network. This lends well to preview mode as a rollout safety mechanism as the proposed changes to a Policy can simply be logged instead of enforced.

Reviewer: "...to a specific set of outcome. For example, a FirewallPolicy evaluates to..."

* Break into two sentences
* Add, "a"

#### Other Rollout Safety Mechanisms

> This AIP does not contain guidance for the following rollout safety mechanisms which are commonly grouped together with preview mode.

Reviewer: When using "following", "as follows", etc., the sentence should end in a colon. Please fix.

- Simulation: Replay old production traffic on the new version of a resource and evaluate the results using logging.

> - Offline-validation: Evaluate new version of a resource using a set of user-defined results like CAS/presubmit checks.

Reviewer: "CAS" is the name of an internal service nad has no meaning outside of the company. Please fix.

### Supported Use-Cases

The following use-cases are considered when making a recommendation for API best practices of preview mode:

> - Resource: Each entity to be previewed is a REST resource.

Reviewer: Why not gRPC? What do you mean by a "REST resource". Do you mean CRUDL?

- Collection: A collection of objects live on a REST resource and one or many of these can be previewed.

> Each API recommended below will have a table explaining how it translates to each use-case.

Reviewer: Add one line of whitespace above.

### Nested Collection called Experiments

A new configuration of a Policy which is to be validated using preview mode is stored in a nested collection under that Policy resource.

> In this AIP, we will use the example of a hypothetical Policy resource called “Policy”.

Reviewer: called, "Policy"

add a comma.

> - /projects/{project}/locations/global/policies/{policy}

Reviewer: Why not .../locations/{location}? Why global?

Use backticks here.

Why is this bulleted? It is not a list. Please fix.

> The experimental versions of the resource used for preview mode are stored as a nested collection underneath the Policy. The resource type will follow the convention "<resource_name> + Experiment”.

Reviewer: "underneath" -> "under" for consistency.

> - /projects/{project}/locations/global/policies/{policy}/experiments/{experiment}

Reviewer: Again, why "global"?

Use backticks.

Again, remove bullet, not a list.

> The following proto represents a PolicyExperiment used for preview. It **must** contain the required top-level fields like name, a nested message representing the parent-level Policy fields, and the necessary Metadata fields for preview.

Reviewer: "The proto immediately below represents..." You only should use "the following" and a colon when it follows the sentence exactly.

Or combine the two sentences like,

"The following proto representation of a `PolicyExperiment`, used for preview, **must** contain the required top-level fields like, "name", a nested message representing the parent-level Policy fields, and the necessary Metadata fields for preview."

Overall, the second sentence here is cumbersome and borders on a being a runon sentence. I would use the a numbered list, i.e.

A proto used to represent an experiment **must** contain,

1. The required top-level fields for a resource, like "name" and "etag".
2. A nested message representing the parent-level Policy fields
3. The necessary metadata field for preview

Why is this word, "Metadata", capitalized?

"...a nested message representing the parent-level Policy fields..." is unclear. I would say that it must contain the Policy that is being tested itself or something to that effect.

```proto
message PolicyExperiment {

  // The name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
 

>   // System generated UUID whenever the resource is updated.

Reviewer: Agreed. Remove etag or change comment to match other AIPs. We do not required that it be a UUID.

  string etag = 2;

  // The fields used for log evaluation and eventual promotion.
  Policy policy = 3;

  // Metadata for preview mode only.
  PreviewMetadata preview_metadata = 4 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];
}
```

> - A new proto **should** be used for experiments with the Policy proto inlined inside.

Reviewer: Why not **must**?

The inlined Policy field contains any changes to the parent resource which are to be tested using preview mode.

> - The name inside the embedded Policy message **must** be the name of the parent. 

Reviewer: Is this what we really want? Two resources with the same name? That seems incorrect.

- When the user is ready to promote an experiment, the Policy message field **must** be copied into the live resource and the experiment is deleted. This can be done manually or via a custom verb for commit described below.
- A product **may** support multiple new configurations concurrently in preview for a singular parent Policy. This is represented using two or more resources in the nested collection.
  - The number of configurations in preview for a given parent **may** be capped at a certain number.

>   - 403 **may** be returned if the number of supported actively previewed Policies for a given parent are exceeded.

Reviewer: 403 is unauthorized. This is for perms and is the wrong code. Plus, use a code in words not an http status. These AIPs are for gRPC as well, e.g. `UNAVAILABLE` or `FAILED_PRECONDTION` etc.

> - All resources under the experiments collection **must** be cascade-deleted if the top-level resource is deleted.

Reviewer: "experiment's". This is possessive.

> - All resources under the experiments collection **must** be cascade-deleted if the top-level resource is deleted.

Reviewer: I've never seen, "cascade-deleted", i.e. "cascade deletes", used as a verb. I would change this somehow, maybe to something like the following:

"Cascading deletes should occur: if the top-level resource is deleted, all resources underlying any experiments **must** also be deleted"

> - The etag on the experiment **should** guidance on Resource freshness validation ([AIP-154][aip-154]) and will be a randomly generated UUID ([AIP-148][aip-148]). The etag **should** be present in the preview logs.

Reviewer: "**should** follow the guidance on resource freshness validation"? We don't capitalize resource and I think it reads better with, "the".

Why not **must** for both?

>   - The parent resource **should** have an etag as well.

Reviewer: Why not **must**?

>   - Both etags **should** be present in the preview logs to uniquely identify the version of the live and experimental policies. These will change when either Policy configurations change.

Reviewer: Again, why not **must**?

[aip-148]: https://aip.dev/148
[aip-154]: https://aip.dev/154

### Metadata

> A Metadata object is used to track all variables pertinent to a preview.

Reviewer: I don't think "Metadata" should be capitalized in this case as alluded to above.

Reviewer 2: doesn't this conflict with your guidance above that section headings should be capitalized?

Reviewer 2: Oh I see, you're referring to the object.

 
```proto 
message PreviewMetadata {
  // State of the previewed resource. Possible values are ACTIVE and INACTIVE, the 
  // former which indicates that results are being logged downstream.
  string state = 1;

>   // Metadata string common to all preview mode logs for the product. Searching 

Reviewer: Using the word "Metadata" inside of `<resource_name>Metadata` is confusing. "Identifying string..."?

>   // logs for this string will isolate all logs pertaining to preview mode only.

Reviewer: "...pertaining to this preview."

>   string log_type = 2;

Reviewer: `log_prefix` or `log_identifier` would be better. `_type` infers that it is drawn from a discrete set.

  // The start time of the current preview.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp start_time = 3;

  // The latest stop time of the preview.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp stop_time = 4;
}
```

> - PreviewMetadata **must** have the fields defined in the proto above and **must** use the same set of values for state.

Reviewer: Use backticks, `PreviewMetadata`.  There are a lot of places where you refer to symbols throughout that need to be updated. ptal.

> - A shared proto used across services **must not** be used ([AIP-213][aip-123]).

Reviewer: > Each resource type that can be previewed must have a distinct `PreviewMetadata` proto. A shared proto, used across services, **must not** be used.

How does this work with naming collisions for protos in a package? Do you mean that it should be like `<resource_type>PolicyPreviewMetadata`, e.g. `FirewallPolicyPreviewMetadata`?

Reviewer: What was the resolution on this one?

> - When a preview is first started, PreviewMetadata **must** be empty. It will only be present on experiments once a custom verb has been used to start it.

Reviewer: `PreviewMetadata` is a message and the field is called, "preview_metadata". I think you mean that the latter must be empty. Please clarify.

> - All fields **must** be output only.

Reviewer: "All preview metadata fields..."

> - The state field **must** only be updated by the Control Plane:

Reviewer: Change "Control Plane" to "service". We do not use control/data/management plane in the AIPs.

>   - The state **should** subsequently be altered between ACTIVE and INACTIVE to start or stop downstream evaluation using custom verbs described below.

Reviewer: Why not **must**?

>   - The state **should** subsequently be altered between ACTIVE and INACTIVE to start or stop downstream evaluation using custom verbs described below.

Reviewer: "custom verbs" -> "custom methods"

> - The first time the startPreview custom verb is used, the Control Plane **must** create the PreviewMetadata and adds: 

Reviewer: "custom method"

> - The first time the startPreview custom verb is used, the Control Plane **must** create the PreviewMetadata and adds: 

Reviewer: Only use colon with "as follows", "the following", or similar. Please fix.

>   - state = ACTIVE

Reviewer: This is too terse. Say something like,

> It **must** set the "state" to `ACTIVE`

>   - log_type string which is common to all preview mode logs for the product.

Reviewer: What do you mean? It sets it. Too terse. Please fix.

What does it set it to?

>   - start_time

Reviewer: Same, too terse. Use backticks.

> - When the stopPreview custom verb is used, the Control Plane **must** update PreviewMetadata with

Reviewer: Use a comma after "with" at the end of the line.

  - state = INACTIVE

>   - stop_time

Reviewer: Add better explanatory text. See other AIPs.

> - start_time **must** be recreated every time the status is changed to ACTIVE.

Reviewer: "recreated"? "reset" might be better or explain more fully. "updated" is better.

> [aip-123]: https://aip.dev/123

Reviewer: Put named links at the bottom of the file.

> ### Extensibility to Collection use-case

Reviewer: Remove, "use-case",

### Collection extensibility

> For the Collection use-case, Rule is a repeated nested message on a Policy resource as shown below.

Reviewer: Downcase, "Collection"

> For the Collection use-case, Rule is a repeated nested message on a Policy resource as shown below.

Reviewer: A nested message is a message that is declared inside of another one. I think you mean "`Rule` is found as the type of a repeated field on `Policy`". Please fix and re-read through for use of "nested message". It is not self-explanatory and is might be misused here and above.

```proto
message Policy {

  string name = 1;

>   Rule[] rules = 2;

Reviewer: `repeated Rule rules = 2`. Proto does not have `[]` syntax.

  // Other existing fields…
}
```

> A experiment is created for the entire parent resource. So essentially, there will be a experiment with its own set of rules. The following guidelines **should** be used to determine how to author an experiment when “rules” is a repeated nested message.

Reviewer: "An experiment..."

> A experiment is created for the entire parent resource. So essentially, there will be a experiment with its own set of rules. The following guidelines **should** be used to determine how to author an experiment when “rules” is a repeated nested message.

Reviewer: Define "parent resource" at the very beginning of this AIP. It is not clear what this means. I know you mean that it is the resource under test, but I don't know that it is clear to the reader.

> To show the deltas between a live resource and its experiment, the following example will be used:

Reviewer: "deltas" to "changes". This is jargon. Please avoid it for reference docs.

A live resource has rules: [rule1, rule2]

Each example below will show the value of the spec field in the experiment, and the intended result.

Create rule3 in preview mode:
Experiment resource rules: [rule1, rule2, rule3]

Preview the deletion of rule 2:
Experiment resource rules: [rule1]

Update rule2 to rule2’:
Experiment resource rules: [rule1, rule2’]

### APIs

> Experiments **must** follow resource-oriented design as stated in ([AIP-121][aip-121]). Additionally, the following guidance **must** be followed which is specific to Experiments.

Reviewer: You say, "the following", use a colon.

> [aip-121]: https://google.aip.dev/121#methods

Reviewer: Move to end.

#### create

> - Creating a new Experiment for preview mode **should** support the following use-cases:

Reviewer: Why not **must**?

  - Preview a new Policy.

>   - Updating a current Policy.

Reviewer: Can you update a Policy that is not a preview with "create"? Please clarify.

Reviewer: What was the resolution to this question?

  - Preview the deletion of a current Policy.

> - Previewing a change to a current Policy (update or delete use-cases) **should** require copying the full payload of the live resource into the inlined Policy field and making changes to fields-under-test as needed for preview. Delete requires setting rules collection to null.

Reviewer: Why not **must**?

> - Previewing a change to a current Policy (update or delete use-cases) **should** require copying the full payload of the live resource into the inlined Policy field and making changes to fields-under-test as needed for preview. Delete requires setting rules collection to null.

Reviewer: Should this be "or"? "copying the full payload of the resource into the inlined Policy field or making changes to fields-under-test..."?

"field-under-test" should not be hyphenated. Just say, "the fields under test".

The sentence starting, "Previewing a change..." is cumbersome and hard to understand. Please see if you can change from passive to active voice and consider breaking into two sentences.

Reviewer: This comment was missed.

> - Previewing a change to a current Policy (update or delete use-cases) **should** require copying the full payload of the live resource into the inlined Policy field and making changes to fields-under-test as needed for preview. Delete requires setting rules collection to null.

Reviewer: In proto, repeated fields cannot be null; they can only be empty. Please fix.

>   - The name inside “Policy” **must** be the name of the parent.

Reviewer: I would say, "the value of "name"..."

> - Previewing the creation of a brand new Policy **should** be supported. 

Reviewer: Why not **must**?

>   - If the Control Plane does not support a nested collection without a parent, the user **should** create a top-level resource which has the correct rules to represent a No-Op. Then, experiments can be added underneath that resource.

Reviewer: Remove "Control Plane".

>   - If the Control Plane does not support a nested collection without a parent, the user **should** create a top-level resource which has the correct rules to represent a No-Op. Then, experiments can be added underneath that resource.

Reviewer: Why not **must**?

>   - If the Control Plane does not support a nested collection without a parent, the user **should** create a top-level resource which has the correct rules to represent a No-Op. Then, experiments can be added underneath that resource.

Reviewer: Downcase "No-Op".

>   - If the Control Plane does not support a nested collection without a parent, the user **should** create a top-level resource which has the correct rules to represent a No-Op. Then, experiments can be added underneath that resource.

Reviewer: "underneath" -> "under" for consitency.

> - If multiple previews are supported, calling the create more than once on a resource **should** lead to the creation of multiple experiments represented as new subresources until the quota is reached.

Reviewer: Why not **must**?

---
id: 236
state: approved
created: 2023-03-05
updated: 2023-03-05
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 0
---

# Policy preview

This AIP provides guidance for a rollout safety mechanism to help customers

> safely make changes to their resources.

Reviewer: This paragraph/sentence has been bugging me because it seems redundant, using "safety" and "safely" concurrently, but I haven't been able to think of a better rewrite. Also, other AIPs don't say, "This AIP...". How about simply,

> To safely update resources, it is beneficial to test these changes via policy rollout APIs.

Also, given that the length of the sentence. I would combine it with the subsequent paragraph. Finally, I would change the ordering of the sentences.

> Changes to Policy configurations without proper validation may have unintended consequences that can severely impact a customer’s overall infrastructure setup. To safely update resources, it is beneficial to test these changes via policy rollout APIs.

Also note that I changed "which" to "that can". "Which" is always preceded by a comma, whereas "that" is not. I think "that" is a better choice here, but it's a super-nit.

Changes to Policy configurations without proper validation may have unintended
consequences which severely impact a customer’s overall infrastructure setup.

> Previews are a rollout safety mechanism for Policy resources which gives the

Reviewer: Comma before "which".

customer the ability to validate the effect of their proposed changes against
live production traffic prior to the changes going live.

## Guidance

### System changes

The API logic of this mechanism pushes an experimental version of a proposed

> change to the upstream system (data plane) while the existing live version

Reviewer: "...while the exiting live version, known as the, "effective version", remains active."

This way when you use "effective version" later, it links the terminology--"live version" and "effective version".

> change to the upstream system (data plane) while the existing live version

Reviewer: nit: make two sentences, remove the parentheses, and make "changes" plural and say,

> As an API consumer, one can validate that the experiment introduces the intended changes. The endpoints described below activate these proposals. The experimental configurations propagate upstream to the data plane, but the existing effective version of the resource continues to remain active. **Importantly**, while incoming requests are evaluated against experimental versions, only the effective version affects live traffic. Concurrently, the system **logs** how the the policy experiment proposals **would** affect traffic should they be promoted to serve as the active policy. This mechanism allows API consumer to observe changed proposed by an experiment without risking unintended side effects for live traffic.

remains active. Both versions of the configuration are subsequently evaluated
for incoming traffic, however only the effective version’s configurations
actually have the ability to alter traffic. Meanwhile, the output of the
experimental version is logged so a customer can validate that the proposed
changes are as intended. This gives the customer the ability to fully understand
the effects of the new configuration against live traffic before replacing
the effective configuration with it.

### Non-goals

#### Non-policy resources

> This rollout safety mechanism is for policies only.  

Reviewer: Add a sentence after this one to state what the non-goal is rather than something else. 

> This proposal is for a safety mechanism for *policy* rollouts only. Safe rollouts for resources that are not governed by "policies" are not in scope.

A Policy is a customer-owned resource with a set of rules that govern the

> behavior of how other resources admit or deny a target entity  Generally, the

Reviewer: First sentence rewrite,

> A Policy is a resource that provides rules that admit or deny access to other resources.

You're missing a period between the first sentence and the second as well.

outcome of a Policy can be evaluated to a specific set of outcomes. For example,
a FirewallPolicy evaluates to either ALLOW or DENY for incoming traffic into

> a Virtual Network. This lends well to preview mode as a rollout safety mechanism

Reviewer: Last sentence,

> Firewall policies exemplify a case that is suitable for preview. The service simply logs the traffic that the firewall policy would accept or deny before making live changes to the configuration.

as the proposed changes to a Policy can simply be logged instead of enforced.

### Nested collection called experiments

> A new configuration of a Policy which is to be validated using preview mode is

Reviewer: Remove "which is".

> A new configuration of a Policy to be validated using preview mode...

stored as a nested collection under that Policy resource.

> In this AIP, we will use the example of a hypothetical Policy resource called,

Reviewer: "In this AIP" is an anti-pattern imo.

Just say,

> A hypothetical Policy Resource called, `Policy`, will be used throughout. It has the following resource name pattern:

`Policy`. The following is the pattern for the resource name:

`projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}`

> The experimental versions of the resource used for preview mode are stored as a

Reviewer: "are stored" -> "are represented".

We're talking about the wire format. How the service implements the storage is orthoginal.

nested collection under `Policy`. The resource type will follow the convention
"<resource_name> + Experiment”. The following is the pattern for the experiment:

`/projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}/experiments/{experiment}`

A proto used to represent an experiment **must** contain the following fields:

  1. The required top-level fields for a resource, like `name` and `etag`.
  2. The Policy that is being tested itself.

>   3. The `preview_metadata` field for preview.

Reviewer: Simply

> The field, `preview_metadata`

>   3. The `preview_metadata` field for preview.

Reviewer: Remove periods. These are not sentences.

```proto
message PolicyExperiment {

  // The name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
 

>   // The fields used for log evaluation and eventual promotion.

Reviewer: "The fields used" seems incorrect. This one field, "policy". I would say the,

> // The policy experiment. This Policy will be used to simulate the effects of the change but will affect life traffic.

>   Policy policy = 2;

Reviewer: Is the field name always, `policy`? For example if the the type is `FirewallPolicy` is the field name still `policy`? I think it should be, and if you agree please add this as a **must** below.

>   // Metadata for preview mode only.

Reviewer: > // The metadata associated with this policy experiment.

  PreviewMetadata preview_metadata = 3 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];
}
```

> - A new proto **must** be used for experiments with the Policy proto inlined

Reviewer: - A new proto **must** be used for each experiment. There **must not** be a common `<ResourceName>Preview` proto for all experiments.
    - The experiment proto **must** contain a field of the type that is the same as the policy resource to which the  experiment applies.
    - To introduce experimental behavior, change the values of this proto.

  inside.
  - The inlined Policy field contains any changes to the live policy that are to
    be tested using preview mode.
- The name inside the embedded Policy message **must** be the name of the live
  poliicy. 
- When the user is ready to promote an experiment, the Policy message field

>   **must** be copied into the live resource and the experiment is deleted.

Reviewer: Remove "is". "...and the experiment deleted."

>   This can be done manually or via a custom method for commit described below.

Reviewer: "...a custom method that commits the changes, which is described below."

> - A product **may** support multiple new configurations concurrently in preview

Reviewer: "...multiple simulated configurations concurrently...

>   for a single live Policy. This is represented using two or more resources in

Reviewer: Drop the sentence, "This is represented...in the nested collection." to be a sub-bullet in the list immediately below, a sibling of "The number of configurations...".

  the nested collection.

>   - The number of configurations in preview for a given live policy **may** be

Reviewer: "The number of experimental configuration for a given live policy..."

    capped at a certain number.
- Cascading deletes **must** occur: if the top-level resource is deleted, all
  experiments **must** also be deleted.

### Metadata
A `preview_metadata` field is used to track all variables pertinent to a preview.
 
```proto 
message PreviewMetadata {

>   // State of the previewed resource. Possible values are ACTIVE and INACTIVE, the 

Reviewer: No need for, "the former". "...ACTiVE and INACTIVE. ACTIVE indicates that..."

  // former which indicates that results are being logged downstream.
  string state = 1;

>   // Ifentifying string common to all preview mode logs for the product. Searching 

Reviewer: "An identifying string..."

  // logs for this string will isolate all logs pertaining to this preview.
  string log_prefix = 2;

>   // The start time of the current preview.

Reviewer: "of this preview"

  google.protobuf.Timestamp start_time = 3;

>   // The latest stop time of the preview.

Reviewer: "of this preview"

  google.protobuf.Timestamp stop_time = 4;
}
```
- `PreviewMetadata` **must** have the fields defined in the proto above and

>   **must** use the same set of values for state.

Reviewer: "set of values for state, `ACTIVE` and `INACTIVE`"

or

"The value for `state` **must** be `ACTIVE` or `INACTIVE`"

- When a preview is first started, `preview_metadata` **must** be empty. It will
  only be present on experiments once a custom method has been used to start it.
- All preview metadata fields **must** be output only.

> - The `state` field **must** only be updated by the service:

Reviewer: Substitute a period for the colon.

>   - The `state` **must** subsequently be altered between ACTIVE and INACTIVE to

Reviewer: Remove leading "The".

> The system **must** change `state` to and from `ACTIVE` and `INACTIVE` when the experiment is started or stopped, which can only be done by the "StartPreview" and "StopPreview" custom methods (described below).

    start or stop downstream evaluation using custom methods described below.

> - The first time the startPreview custom method is used, the service **must**

Reviewer: Capitalize startPreview.

  create `preview_metadata` and do the following: 
  - It **must** set the `state` to ACTIVE
  - It **must** set a `log_prefix` string, which is a predefined constant set to

>     the same value for all preview mode logs for the given resource type.

Reviewer: How does the system determine this value. Explain thoroughly and provide example(s).

  - It **must** populate the `start_time` with the current time. 

> - When the stopPreview custom method is used, the service **must** do the

Reviewer: Capitalize stopPreview.

  following:
  - It **must** set the `state` to INACTIVE
  - It **must** populate the `stop_time` with the current time. 
- `start_time` **must** be updated every time the status is changed to ACTIVE.

### APIs

Experiments **must** follow resource-oriented design as stated in
([AIP-121][aip-121]). Additionally, the following guidance **must** be followed

> which is specific to experiments:

Reviewer: This paragraph is unnecessary. Please remove, and remove the named anchor, aip-121, below if unused elsewhere.

#### create

- Creating a new experiment for preview mode **must** support the following
use cases:
  - Preview a new Policy.
  - Preview an update to an already live Policy.
  - Preview a deletion of a current Policy.
- For the update or delete use cases, the `policy` field in the `experiment`
  **must** have the full payload of the live policy copied into it, including
  the name. 
  - The fields under test **must** be updated to the new intended state to 
    preview an update.
  - The `rules` **must** be set to empty to preview a delete.
- Previewing the creation of a brand new Policy **must** be supported. 
  - If the service does not support a nested collection without a live policy, 
    the user **must** create a top-level resource which has the correct rules to

>     represent a no-op. Then, experiments can be added under that resource.

Reviewer: Break into two or more bullets.

> - If multiple previews are supported, calling the create more than once on a

Reviewer: Remove "the", "...calling "create" more than once..."

Remove "...on a resource...".

> If the system supports multiple previews for this experiment type, calling "create" more than once **must** create multiple experiment resources, which are represented as new subresource until the experimental policy limit is reached.

Of note, "quota" is generally thought of in terms of rates.

  resource **must** lead to the creation of multiple experiments which are
  represented as new subresources until the set quota is reached.

#### update

> - The name inside “Policy” **must not** be changed.

Reviewer: "be changed" -> "change"

> - The service **must** set the `state` to INACTIVE if the `state` was ACTIVE at

Reviewer: "update" makes the policy experiment inactive? This seems like a poor user experience. Is there rationale behind this behavior?

Reviewer: @bgrant0607 do you have any thoughts about this behavior in terms of if is the correct thing to do?

Reviewer 3: It seems reasonable to me. The most obvious alternative would be to make the experiment immutable.

Stopping the previous experiment records a stop time and then calling preview again would enable a different log prefix to be specified for the new experiment and record a new start time.

Reviewer: Ack. That may actually improve usability of the feature while making it less error prone from a transactional standpoint. @nitinapi, wdyt?

cc @loudej

  the time of an update. This is so the user can easily distinguish between 
  previews of different fields-under-test.

#### list

> - Filtering on `PreviewMetadata.state` **must** indicate which experiments are

Reviewer: Change to, "list must support filtering on the state of each policy experiment..." or the like.

  actively being previewed or not.

### Live policy API changes

The following guidance **must** be followed for live resources which use
experiments as a nested collection for preview.

#### delete

> - A delete of the top-level resource **must** delete all experiments.

Reviewer: Don't use "top-level". Three terms for the same thing is confusing. Use "live" or "effective".

- To maintain the experiments, the top-level Policy **must** be changed to a
  no-op Policy instead of using delete.

### Custom method APIs

#### startPreview

```proto

> rpc StartPreviewPolicyExperiment(StartPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {

Reviewer: Add method comment.

> rpc StartPreviewPolicyExperiment(StartPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {

Reviewer: This method name does not comply with AIP-136. It should contain the resource name. The resources described herein are, `Policy` and `PolicyExperiment`. Can we try to come up with a custom method name pattern that is compliant with AIP-136?

  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:startPreview"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "PolicyExperiment"
    metadata_type: "StartPreviewPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

message StartPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest {

>   string name = 1;

Reviewer: Add field comment.

>   string etag = 2;

Reviewer: Why would start have an etag on the request?

}

message StartPreviewPolicyExperimentMetadata {}
```

> - Admin flow API to start previewing a resource **must** be implemented.

Reviewer: Simply say, "This custom method is required."

>   - Remains declarative friendly as only an output only field is modified.

Reviewer: Remove; unnecessary. Also, the nomenclature, "declarative-friendly" may be dropped.

- If startPreview is called specifically on a resource which is already being

>   previewed, then it **must** return an error message.

Reviewer: What error? PRECONDITION_FAILURE? Describe the error--status, code, and message.

- When startPreview is called, the system **must** set values for the

>   `log_prefix`, and `start_time` in `PreviewMetadata` and set the state to ACTIVE.

Reviewer: Backticks around `ACTIVE`.

- If startPreview is called on an experiment with an empty set of rules, the

>   deletion of that resource **must** be previewed.

Reviewer: nit: "previewed" -> "simulated"

> - startPreview is not idempotent and using it twice on the same resource

Reviewer: Why? It could be.

  **must** return an error.

> - Etags **must** be used to guarantee resource freshness.

Reviewer: Describe what "etag" means in the context of startPreview.

#### stopPreview

```proto

> rpc StopPreviewPolicyExperiment(StopPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {

Reviewer: Needs method comment.

Same wrt to AIP-136 compliance.

  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:stopPreview"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "PolicyExperiment"
    metadata_type: "StopPreviewPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

message StopPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest {
  string name = 1;

>   string etag = 2;

Reviewer: Need field comments.

}

message StopPreviewPolicyExperimentMetadata {}
```

> - Admin flow API to stop previewing a resource **must** be implemented.

Reviewer: Same as above, "...is required..." will suffice.

  - Remains declarative friendly as only an output only field is modified.
- If stopPreview is called specifically on a resource which is not actively
  being previewed, then it **must** return an error message.
- When the API is called, the `state` **must** be set to INACTIVE and
  `stop_time` **must** be set to the current time.

> - stopPreview is not idempotent, calling stop twice on the same resource

Reviewer: Same. Why?

  **must** return an error.

> - Etags **must** be used to guarantee resource freshness.

Reviewer: What does this mean in the context of stopPreview?

#### commit

A new API called commit **may** be implemented to promote the experimental
configuration of a resource to the effective version and perform necessary

> cleanup. It will copy the fields-under-test from the experiment into the live

Reviewer: "the field that are under test"

policy and then delete the experiment.

> This is a convenience API which is not declarative friendly. The alternative

Reviewer: Remove the first sentence for the reasons mentioned above. Change, the second sentence to,

> Declarative clients can manually copy fields from an experiment into the live Policy and then delete the experiment rather than calling "commit" if preferrable.

supported for declarative clients is to manually copy fields from an experiment
onto the live Policy then delete the experiment.

```proto

> rpc CommitPolicyExperiment(CommitPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {

Reviewer: Needs a method comment.

  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:commit"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "google.protobuf.Empty"
    metadata_type: "CommitPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

message CommitPolicyExperimentRequest {
  string name = 1;
  string etag = 2;
  string parent_etag = 3; // optional.
}

message CommitPolicyExperimentMetadata {}
```

> - Commit **must** atomically copy the fields-under-test from the experiment into

Reviewer: "the fields that are under test"

>   the live Policy then deletes the experiment.

Reviewer: Subject verb confusion.

"...live Policy and then delete the experiment."

is correct.

- If any experiment fails to be committed, the preview **must** be continued and

>   the Policy **must** not be updated.

Reviewer: Active voice.

"If any experiment fails "commit", the preview **must** continue, and the policy **must not** be update."

Notice the command before "and". This is a comma splice without it. Etc.

> - Commit is not idempotent and calling commit twice on the same experiment

Reviewer: What error? Should be 404 NOT_FOUND imo b/c it's not there.

  **must** return an error.

> - Commit **may** be called at any point of time for an experiment resource being

Reviewer: "...any point in time when an..."

  used for preview, either when the logs are actively being generated or after

>   they are stopped. It has the same behavior in each case.

Reviewer: > "commit" **may** be called on an policy experiment resource whether the in the `ACTiVE` or `INACTIVE` state. It has the same behavior for both cases.

> - Etags **must** be used to guarantee resource freshness.

Reviewer: Describe what the connotation of an "etag" is in the context of the case of invoking this method. Don't capitalize "etag" and throughout.

### Logging

> Logging is critical to a user evaluating whether an experiment being previewed

Reviewer: Active voice,

> Logging is crucial to evaluate if an experiment should be promoted from experimental to effective.

I would add something about the `log_prefix` being present as well. It is hard to see the delta by the etag alone.

---
id: 236
state: approved
created: 2023-03-28
updated: 2023-03-28
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 0
---

# Policy preview

> Changes to policy configurations without proper validation may have unintended

Reviewer 4: As far as I can see, we don't talk about policies anywhere else. (`grep policy $(find aip)` doesn't find anything relevant.)

If we're going to talk about previews to a policy configuration, we should define what a policy configuration is first. I don't know whether that would be in a separate AIP.

consequences that can severely impact a customer’s overall infrastructure setup.
To safely update resources, it is beneficial to test these changes via policy
rollout APIs.

Previews are a rollout safety mechanism for policy resources, which gives the
customer the ability to validate the effect of their proposed changes against
live production traffic prior to the changes going live.

## Guidance

### System changes

> As an API consumer, one can validate that the experiment introduces the intended

Reviewer 4: Isn't it really about an API administrator? Most *consumers* won't need to know about policies, and probably won't be able to tell that the preview has rolled out at all.

Alternatively, we should talk about two different APIs: the policy API and the "regular" API (better naming suggestions welcome). The API administrator is the consumer of the policy API, and regular API consumers are consumers of the regular API - I know how repetitive that sounds. I think it's worth distinguishing between those two roles, quite possibly just in this AIP.

changes. The endpoints described below activate these proposals. The
experimental configurations propagate upstream to the data plane, but the
existing live version of the resource continues to remain active. Importantly,
while incoming requests are evaluated against experimental versions, only the
live version affects active traffic. Concurrently, the system logs how the
policy experiment proposals would affect traffic should they be promoted to
be the live policy. This mechanism allows API consumer to observe changes
proposed by an experiment without risking unintended side effects for live
traffic.

### Non-goals

#### Non-policy resources

This proposal is for a safety mechanism for policy rollouts only. Safe rollouts
for resources that are not governed by "policies" are not in scope.

> A policy is a resource that provides rules that admit or deny access to other

Reviewer 4: This is the definition that I think probably needs to be front and center. That could be by making this AIP "everything about policies" (including a section about previews) or it could be that we have a separate AIP about policies, and make this AIP just about preview.

We *may* want to scope the term a bit more though - "access policy" perhaps? (There might be other resources which are reasonably described as "policies" as well.)

resources. Generally, the outcome of a policy can be evaluated to a specific set
of outcomes. Firewall policies exemplify a case that is suitable for preview.
The system simply logs the traffic that the firewall policy would accept or
deny before making live changes to the configuration.

> ### Nested collection called experiments

Reviewer 4: Can we not align on a single name - experiments or preview - and use it everywhere?

It sounds like this AIP could be renamed to "Policy Experiments" and avoid using the term "preview" *anywhere* - which would be good in terms of reserving that term for preview versions for APIs.

A new configuration of a policy to be validated using preview mode is stored as
a nested collection under that policy resource.

A hypothetical policy Resource called, `Policy`, will be used throughout. It
has the following resource name pattern:

`projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}`

The experimental versions of the resource used for preview mode are represented
as a nested collection under `Policy`. The resource type will follow the

> convention "<resource_name> + Experiment”. The following is the pattern for the

Reviewer 4: Odd mix of quote styles here. And I suspect Markdown may not like the angle brackets. You might make it something like:

*RegularResourceName*`Experiment`

experiment:

`projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}/experiments/{experiment}`

A proto used to represent an experiment **must** contain the following fields:

  1. The required top-level fields for a resource, like `name` and `etag`
  2. The policy that is being tested itself

>   3. The field, `preview_metadata` for preview

Reviewer 4: This would become `experiment_metadata` under my proposal. (I assume it's not just `metadata` because that's likely to become a cross-resource thing?)

```proto
message PolicyExperiment {

>   // The name of the PolicyExperiment.

Reviewer 4: Resource name, right? Let's call that out in the example.

  string name = 1;
 
  // The policy experiment. This Policy will be used to simulate the effects of
  // the change but will affect life traffic.
  Policy policy = 2;

  // The metadata associated with this policy experiment.

>   PreviewMetadata preview_metadata = 3 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];

Reviewer 4: Unless we expect one common metadata type, I'd propose this has a name of *RegularResourceName*`ExperimentMetadata`. That means if there are multiple policy resources, they'd each have their own experiment resource type, each with its own metadata type.

Reviewer: Yes, I also called this out. I'm unclear about what the resolution was on this topic. @nitinapi please explain?

}
```

> - A new proto **must** be used for each experiment. There **must not** be a

Reviewer 4: I'd add a line break between the code fence and the list.

Reviewer 4: I think "each experiment" may be a little confusing. It's more each experiment resource type... an API consumer could create multiple experiements ("what if we block everyone called Sam?" and "what if we block everyone called Jon?") without more protos. I know this sort of drops out when you think about it further, but lets avoid the mental friction.

>   common <ResourceName>Preview proto for all experiments.

Reviewer 4: More angle brackets that may not work well.

  - It **must not** use the same resource type as the live policy.
- The experiment proto **must** contain a top-level field with the same type as
   the live policy. 
  - It **must** be named as the live resource type. For example, if the
    experiment is for FirewallPolicy, then this field **must** be named

>     firewall_policy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    `firewall_policy`.
```

- The name inside the embedded policy message **must** be the name of the live
  policy. 
- When the user is ready to promote an experiment, they **must** copy the 
  `policy` message into the live policy and delete the experiment. This can be

>   done manually or via a "commit" method.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  done manually or via a "commit" custom method.
```

> - A product **may** support multiple simulated configurations concurrently in

Reviewer 4: This is where I'd refer to "multiple experiments" (to avoid introducing new terminology like "simulated configurations").

  preview for a single live policy. 

>   - This is represented using two or more resources in the nested collection.

Reviewer 4: Should the results of the experiment be logged in terms of "as if all policies were as live, but with the addition/modification of this single experiment policy"? In other words, two experiments shouldn't interfere with each other? We may want a whole extra section about this.

>   - The number of experimental configuration for a given live policy **may** be

Reviewer 4: I'd say that if this is the case, the cap **must** be documented.

    capped at a certain number.
- Cascading deletes **must** occur: if the top-level resource is deleted, all
  experiments **must** also be deleted.

> ### Metadata

Reviewer 4: Nit: add blank line after heading.

> A `preview_metadata` field is used to track all variables pertinent to a

Reviewer 4: Can we try to use simpler language than "all variables pertinent to a preview"?

preview.
 
```proto 

> message PreviewMetadata {

Reviewer 4: Is this expected to be a single message type across all experiments for all APIs? If so, we should have it in the common protos somewhere. If not, do we expect *exactly* these fields in each type, or is this just an example?

Reviewer 4: Ah, this is somewhat answered later... although it doesn't say whether there can be additional fields. (If we're really asking users to copy/paste this and *exactly* this everywhere, I'd really prefer a common proto if we're confident in it.)

  // State of the previewed resource. Possible values are ACTIVE and INACTIVE. 
  // ACTIVE indicates that results are being logged downstream.

>   string state = 1;

Reviewer 4: If it's only *ever* going to be ACTIVE or INACTIVE, a Boolean would be simpler. There's the option of an enum here as well - with all the associated potential downsides, of course.

  // An identifying string common to all preview mode logs for the product.
  // Searching logs for this string will isolate all logs pertaining to this
  // preview.
  string log_prefix = 2;

  // The start time of this preview.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp start_time = 3;

>   // The latest stop time of this preview.

Reviewer 4: "Latest" as in "it **will** automatically be stopped at this point" or "latest" as in "when this **was** most recently stopped"?

Reviewer 4: (I'm pretty sure it's "most recent", in which case I'd use that terminology, and also apply it to `start_time`.)

  google.protobuf.Timestamp stop_time = 4;
}
```

> - `PreviewMetadata` **must** have the fields defined in the proto above and the

Reviewer 4: Nit: blank line after the code fence. (I'll stop pointing these out now, but basically include a blank line between any two sections, e.g. a header and text, or code and a paragraph or list.)

  value of `state` **must** be `ACTIVE` or `INACTIVE`.

> - When a preview is first started, `preview_metadata` **must** be empty. It is

Reviewer 4: "Empty" is unclear here - I suspect you mean "absent", but I'm not sure. ("Empty" suggests to me "present, but all fields just having default values".)

>   present on experiments once the "preview" method is used.

Reviewer 4: This is the first time I think the preview method has been mentioned. It would probably be good to have an "expected flow" earlier which includes it. We shouldn't need to read on in order to understand this bit.

- All preview metadata fields **must** be output only.
- The system must change `state` to and from `ACTIVE` and `INACTIVE` when the
  experiment is started or stopped, which can only be done by the "preview" and
  "stop" custom methods.
- The first time the "preview" custom method is used, the system **must** create
  `preview_metadata` and do the following: 
  - It **must** set the `state` to `ACTIVE`
  - It **must** set a `log_prefix` string, which is a predefined constant
    hard coded by the system developers. The same value is used for all preview
    logs for the given resource type. An example is "FirewallPolicyPreviewLog".
  - It **must** populate the `start_time` with the current time. 
- When the "stop" custom method is used, the system **must** do the following:
  - It **must** set the `state` to `INACTIVE`
  - It **must** populate the `stop_time` with the current time. 
- `start_time` **must** be updated every time the status is changed to `ACTIVE`.

> ### APIs

Reviewer 4: Rename section to "methods"? (The term "API" is massively overloaded...)

#### create

- Creating a new experiment for preview **must** support the following use
cases:
  - Preview a new policy.
  - Preview an update to an already live policy.
  - Preview a deletion of a current policy.

> - For the update and delete use cases, the `policy` field in the `experiment`

Reviewer 4: Not sure why experiment is in code font here. Just "experiment resource" or similar, without any quotes?

  **must** have the full payload of the live policy copied into it, including
  the name. 
  - The user **must** update the fields under test to the new intended state to 
    preview an update.

>   - The user **must** set the `rules` to empty to preview a delete.

Reviewer 4: This is the first time a `rules` field has been mentioned. Are we assuming that every policy resource will have such a field? As an alternative, could we not create an experiment with an unset field to indicate "this experiment pretends that the live resource doesn't exist"?

- Previewing a new policy **must** be supported. 

>   - If the system does not support a nested collection without a live policy, 

Reviewer 4: Again, this seems to make assumptions about what policies look like. Can't we just require that the system *must* support a nested collection without a live policy? Aside from anything else, I can imagine a use case where an individual *does* have access to create an experiment, but *doesn't* have access to modify live policy... it would be a shame for them to have to go through hoops to create a no-op live policy if their real intention is just to create an experiment.

    the user **must** create a top-level resource which has the empty rules in
    order to represent a no-op.
  - Experiments are added as children of the no-op policy and their effect is
    previewed.
- If the system supports multiple previews for this experiment type, calling
  "create" more than once **must** create multiple experiment resources. These
  are represented as new subresources until the experimental policy limit is
  reached.

#### update

- The name inside `policy` **must not** change.

> - The system **may** set the `state` to INACTIVE if the `state` was ACTIVE at

Reviewer 4: I don't understand this point, to be honest... but I think it would be good to make the behavior consistent across APIs. I would be fine with this being a must, if we want to do it anywhere.

  the time of an update. This is so the user can easily distinguish between 
  previews of different fields-under-test.

#### list

- List **must** support filtering on the state of each experiment.
  - Filtering on `PreviewMetadata` indicates which experiments are actively 
    previewed.

### Live policy API changes

The following guidance **must** be followed for live resources which use
experiments as a nested collection for preview.

#### delete

- A delete of the live policy **must** delete all experiments.
- To maintain the experiments while negating the effect of the live policy, the
  live policy **must** be changed to a no-op policy instead of using delete.

> ### Custom method APIs

Reviewer 4: I don't personally think this needs a separate section.

> #### Preview

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### preview
```

(For consistency with earlier references and the methods above - please adjust all methods below similarly.)

```proto

> // Starts the preview of a PolicyExperiment. This starts the log generation to

Reviewer 4: Again, I'd like to get rid of the term "preview" everywhere. This feels like it should just be "start" to be consistent with "stop". It's just starting the PolicyExperiment.

- When the method is called, the system **must** set values for the
  `log_prefix`, and `start_time` in `PreviewMetadata` and set the state to
  `ACTIVE`.
- If the method is called on an experiment with an empty set of rules, the
  system **must** simulate the deletion of the live policy.

#### Stop

```proto
// Stops the preview of a PolicyExperiment. This stops the log generation to
// evaluate the PolicyExperiment.
rpc StopPolicyExperiment(StopPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:stop"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "PolicyExperiment"
    metadata_type: "StopPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

message StopPolicyExperimentRequest {
  // The name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
}

message StopPolicyExperimentMetadata {}
```
- This custom method is required.
- This method **must** trigger the system to stop generating logs for preview.
- When the method is called, the `state` **must** be set to `INACTIVE` and
  `stop_time` **must** be set to the current time.

#### Commit

> The resource may expose a new API called Commit to promote the experimental

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The resource may expose a new custom method called "commit" to promote the experimental
```

configuration of a resource to the live version and perform necessary cleanup.
When used, the system copies the fields that are under test from the experiment
into the live policy and then deletes the experiment.

> Declarative clients **may** manually copy fields from an experiment into the

Reviewer 4: How are we expecting declarative clients to start and stop the experiments? (My understanding was that declarative clients really don't get on well with custom methods. I may have misunderstood.)

  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:commit"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "google.protobuf.Empty"
    metadata_type: "CommitPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

message CommitPolicyExperimentRequest {
  string name = 1;
  string etag = 2;
  string parent_etag = 3; // optional.
}

message CommitPolicyExperimentMetadata {}
```
- The method **must** atomically copy `policy` in the PolicyExperiment into the
  live policy then delete the PolicyExperiment.
- If any experiment fails "commit", the preview **must** continue, and the live
  policy must not be updated.
- The method **may** be called on a PolicyExperiment resource whether the in the
  ACTIVE or INACTIVE state. It has the same behavior for both cases.
- The `etag` **must** match that of the PolicyExperiment for commit to be
  successful. This is so the user does not commit an unintended version of the
  PolicyExperiment.
  - A `parent_etag` **may** exist to guarantee that the PolicyExperiment
  overwrites a specific version of the live policy.
- The method is not idempotent and calling it twice on the same experiment 

>   **must** return a 404 NOT_FOUND as the PolicyExperiment gets deleted.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  **must** return a 404 NOT_FOUND as the PolicyExperiment is deleted as part of the first call.
```

---
id: 236
state: approved

> created: 2022-03-05

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
created: 2023-03-05
```

> updated: 2022-03-05

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
updated: 2023-03-05
```

placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 0
---

> # Policy Preview Mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Policy Preview
```

Note that other design patterns just include the topic (e.g. Jobs, import and export) vs "mode" here.

This is also another resource, so "mode" might not be the right term regardless.

> This AIP provides guidance for one of the many rollout safety mechanisms to help customers safely make changes to their resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This AIP provides guidance for a rollout safety mechanism to help customers safely make changes to their resources.
```

"one of the many" doesn't really add anything here. Best to be terse.

> Preview mode is a rollout safety mechanism for Policy resources which gives the customer the ability to validate the effect of their proposed changes against live production traffic prior to the changes going live. Changes to Policy configurations without proper validation may have unintended consequences which severely impact a customer’s overall infrastructural set up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Changes to Policy configurations without proper validation may have unintended consequences which severely impact a customer’s overall infrastructural set up.

Previews are a rollout safety mechanism for Policy resources which gives the customer the ability to validate the effect of their proposed changes against live production traffic prior to the changes going live.
```

A couple changes here:

1. leading with the problem to help the user understand the context.
2. removing "preview mode" to make it about the concept.

## System Changes

The API logic of this mechanism pushes an “experimental” version of a proposed change to the downstream system (data plane) while the existing “effective” version remains active. Both versions of the configuration are subsequently evaluated for incoming traffic, however, only the effective version’s configurations actually have the ability to alter traffic. Meanwhile, the output of the experimental version is logged so a customer can validate that the proposed changes are as intended. This gives the customer the ability to fully understand the effects of the new configuration against live traffic before replacing the effective configuration with it.

## Non-Goals

### Non-Policy Resources

This rollout safety mechanism is for policies only.  

> A policy is a customer-owned resource with a set of rules that govern the behavior of how GCP resources admit or deny a target entity (e.g. network traffic for firewall rules, general GCP resources with org policy). Generally, the outcome of a policy can be evaluated to a specific set of outcomes, for example, FirewallPolicy evaluates to either ALLOW or DENY for incoming traffic into a Virtual Network. This lends well to preview mode as a rollout safety mechanism as the proposed changes to a policy can simply be logged instead of enforced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A policy is a customer-owned resource with a set of rules that govern the behavior of how other resources admit or deny a target entity (e.g. network traffic for firewall rules, general cloud resources with org policy). Generally, the outcome of a policy can be evaluated to a specific set of outcomes, for example, FirewallPolicy evaluates to either ALLOW or DENY for incoming traffic into a Virtual Network. This lends well to preview mode as a rollout safety mechanism as the proposed changes to a policy can simply be logged instead of enforced.
```

remove "GCP" since this is the general AIPs. The examples are valid.

### Other Rollout Safety Mechanisms

This AIP does not contain guidance for the following rollout safety mechanisms which are commonly grouped together with preview mode.

- Simulation: Replay old production traffic on the new version of a resource and evaluate the results using logging.
- Offline-validation: Evaluate new version of a resource using a set of user-defined results like CAS/presubmit checks.

> ## Guidance

Reviewer 2: move guidance up, to match the formatting of similar AIPs.

### Supported Use-Cases

The following use-cases are considered when making a recommendation for API best practices of preview mode:
- Resource: Each entity to be previewed is a REST resource.
- Collection: A collection of objects live on a REST resource and one or many of these can be previewed.
Each API recommended below will have a table explaining how it translates to each use-case.

### Nested Collection called Experiments

A new configuration of a policy which is to be validated using preview mode is stored in a nested collection under that policy resource.

In this AIP, we will use the example of a hypothetical policy resource called “Policy”.

> - /compute/v1/locations/global/policies/{policy_id}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- /projects/{project}/locations/global/policies/{policy}
```

the `compute/v1/` part of the path violate the collection-oriented principles outlined in other AIPs. so the suggestion makes it align with that guidance.

Reviewer 2: also note that the path is expressed via the resource singular (which unfortunately is confusing with the resource_id name convention).

The experimental versions of the resource used for preview mode are stored as a nested collection underneath the policy. The resource type will follow the convention "<resource_name> + Experiment”.

> - /compute/v1/locations/global/policies/{policy_id}/experiments/{experiment_id}

Reviewer 2: same changes here as above.

This nested collection is extensible to progressive rollout and draft policy use-cases as well, which are out of scope for this AIP.

The following proto represents an experiment Policy used for preview mode. It **must** contain the required top-level fields like name,  a nested message representing the parent-level Policy fields, and the necessary Metadata fields for preview mode.

```proto
message PolicyExperiment {

  // The name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
 
  // System generated UUID whenever the resource is updated.

>   string etag = 2;

Reviewer 2: I'd remove this, etags are discussed in another AIP. Or do you think it's critical to include etag requirement as a behavior detail critical to how experiments operate?

Reviewer: +1, I would just remove `etag`. We don't always include all of the fields in every example, just the ones that are needed to complete the spec.

  - state = INACTIVE
  - stop_time
- start_time **must** be recreated every time the status is changed to ACTIVE.

[aip-123]: https://aip.dev/123

### Extensibility to Collection use-case

For the Collection use-case, Rule is a repeated nested message on a Policy resource as shown below.

```proto
message Policy {

  string name = 1;

  Rule[] rules = 2;

  // Other existing fields…
}
```

An experiment is created for the entire parent resource. So essentially, there will be a PolicyExperiment with its own set of rules. The following guidelines **should** be used to determine how to author a PolicyExperiment when “rules” is a repeated nested message.

To show the deltas between a live resource and its experiment, the following example will be used:
A live resource has rules: [rule1, rule2]

Each example below will show the value of the spec field in the experiment, and the intended result.

Create rule3 in preview mode:
Experiment resource rules: [rule1, rule2, rule3]

Preview the deletion of rule 2:
Experiment resource rules: [rule1]

Update rule2 to rule2’:
Experiment resource rules: [rule1, rule2’]

> ### CRUD APIs

Reviewer 2: re-iterating CRUD is a redundant here, and also re-iterates guidance that exists in other AIPs already.

How about linking to google.aip.dev/121, with something like "preview resources *MUST* follow resource-oriented design"?

If there's guidance on a section that goes beyond AIP-121, I'd only call out the deltas here. That said, things like supported use cases can be expressed via the section that discusses the protobuf message.

```proto
rpc CommitPolicyExperiment(CommitPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:commit"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "google.protobuf.Empty"
    metadata_type: "CommitPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

message CommitPolicyExperimentRequest {
  string name = 1;
  string etag = 2;
  string parent_etag = 3; // optional.
}

message CommitPolicyExperimentMetadata {}
```
- Commit **must** atomically copy the fields-under-test from the experiment into the live policy then deletes the experiment.
- If any experiment fails to be committed, the preview **should** be conitnued and the policy **should** not be updated.
- Commit is not idempotent and calling commit twice on the same experiment **should** return an error.
- Commit **may** be called at any point of time for an experiment resource being used for preview mode, either when the logs are actively being generated or after they are stopped. It has the same behavior in each case.
- Etags **must** be used to guarantee resource freshness.

> ### TTL of the Preview

Reviewer 2: what is TTL in this case? Is there an AIP it refers to?

The context would be valuable if it's a new concept introduced.

There is no recommendation to pass the TTL of a preview to the data plane which. Instead, the TTL can be controlled by the user of the APIs (direct API caller, Terraform, etc) by using the startPreview and stopPreview methods with a delay induced in between.

> ### Logging

Reviewer 2: I kind of feel like logging has to be clarified in an AIP around policy resources overall, so this section is consistent with that.

But do you think this guidance is critical?

evaluation against traffic is logged in order to give the customer the data
required to test the correctness of the change.

Firewall policies exemplify a case that is suitable for previewing. A new 
configuration can be evaluated against traffic to observe which IPs would be 
allowed or denied. This gives the customer the data to guide a decision on
whether to promote the proposed changes to live.

The expected flow for previewing a policy is as follows:

1. The user creates an experiment containing a new policy configuration
   intended to replace the live policy.
2. The user uses the "preview" method to start generating logs which compare
   the live and experiment policy evaluations against live traffic.
3. The user inspects the logs to determine whether the experiment has the
   intended result.
4. The user uses the "commit" method to promote the experiment to live.

## Guidance

### Non-goals

This proposal is for a safety mechanism for policy rollouts only. Safe rollouts
for non-policy resources are not in scope.

### Experiments

A new configuration of a policy to be previewed is stored in a nested

> collection under the policy called experiments.

Reviewer: This is a little confusing because "called experiments" could apply to multiple clauses in the sentence. IMHO, it would be clearer as two sentences.

> A new configuration of a policy to be previewed is stored as a nested collection under the policy. These nested collections are known as experiments.

super-nit only: also notice s/in/as/ as in "stored as a nested collection" rather than "stored in a nested collection".

A hypothetical policy resource called, `Policy`, is used throughout. It has the
following resource name pattern:

`projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}`

The experimental versions of the resource used for previewing or other safe
rollout practices are represented as a nested collection under `Policy` using a
new resource type. The resource type **must** follow the naming convention
*RegularResourceType*`Experiment`. 

The following pattern is used for the experiment collection:

> `projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}/experiments/{experiment}`

Reviewer: Should this be,

`projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}/previews/{preview}`

because you might have

`projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}/rollouts/{rollouts}`

for the same policy resource?

  3. The field, `preview_metadata`, which contains metadata specific to
     previewing the experiment.

```proto
message PolicyExperiment {

  // The resource name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
 
  // The policy experiment. This Policy will be used to preview the effects of
  // the change but will not affect life traffic.
  Policy policy = 2;

  // The metadata associated with this policy experiment.
  PreviewMetadata preview_metadata = 3 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];
}
```

- The experiment proto **must** have a top-level field with the same type as the
  live policy. 
  - It **must** be named as the live resource type. For example, if the
    experiment is for FirewallPolicy, then this field **must** be named
    `firewall_policy`.
  - The name inside the embedded `policy` message **must** be the name of the
    live policy. 
- When the user is ready to promote an experiment, they **must** copy the 
  `policy` message into the live policy and delete the experiment. This can be
  done manually or via a "commit" custom method.
- A product **may** support multiple experiments concurrently being previewed 
  for a single live policy. 

>   - Each experiment **must** generate logs comparing its results to the live

Reviewer: > Each experiment **must** generate logs having each entry preceded by `log_prefix` so that the user can compare the results of the experiment with the behavior of the live policy.

    policy.
  - The number of experimental configurations for a given live policy **may** be
    capped at a certain number.

>     - The cap **must** be documented.

Reviewer: One sub-bullet of this depth is a bit unconventional. Would you mind picking up the trailing bullet and just say, "and the capy **must** be documented" in the preceding bullet?

  google.protobuf.Timestamp start_time = 3;

  // The most recent time at which this experiment stopped previewing.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp stop_time = 4;
}
```

- `PreviewMetadata` **must** have the fields defined in the proto above.
  - `state` **must** be `ACTIVE` or `INACTIVE`.
  - It **may** have additional fields if the service or resource requires it.
- When an experiment is first previewed, `preview_metadata` **must** be absent.
  - It is present on the experiment once the "preview" method is used.
- All preview metadata fields **must** be output only.
- `state` changes to and from `ACTIVE` and `INACTIVE` when the experiment is
  started or stopped, which can only be done by the "preview" and "stop" custom
  methods.
- The first time the "preview" custom method is used, the system **must** create
  `preview_metadata` and do the following: 
  - It **must** set the `state` to `ACTIVE`
  - It **must** populate `start_time` with the current time. 
    - `start_time` **must** be updated every time the status is changed to
      `ACTIVE`.
  - It **must** set a `log_prefix` string, which is a predefined constant

>     hard coded by the system developers. 

Reviewer: It might we worth noting that this (`log_prefix`) is system generated.

    - The same value is used for previewing experiments for the given resource

>       resource type. For example, "FirewallPolicyPreviewLog" for FirewallPolicy.

Reviewer: You have the word "resource" twice in succession here.

- When the "stop" custom method is used, the system **must** do the following:
  - It **must** set the `state` to `INACTIVE`
  - It **must** populate the `stop_time` with the current time. 

### Methods

#### create

- The resource **must** be created using long-running 
  [Create][aip-133-long-running] and 
  `google.longrunning.operation_info.response_type` **must** be

>   PolicyExperiment.

Reviewer: Consider putting "PolicyExperiment" in backticks.

cases:
  - Preview a new policy.
  - Preview an update to an already live policy.
  - Preview a deletion of a current policy.
- For the update and delete use cases, the `policy` field in the experiment
  **must** have the full payload of the live policy copied into it, including
  the name. 
  - The user **must** set the rules to the new intended state to preview an
    update.
  - The user **must** set set the rules to represent a no-op to preview a
    delete.
- To preview a new policy, the system must do the following: 
  - If the system does not support a nested collection without a live policy, 
    the user **must** create a live policy and set the rules to represent a
    no-op. For example, the rules of a no-op policy **may** be empty.
    - An experiment is created as a child of the no-op policy.
- If the system supports previewing multiple experiments for a live policy,
  calling "create" more than once **must** create multiple experiments.

#### update

- The resource **must** be updated using long-running 
  [Update][aip-134-long-running] and 
  `google.longrunning.operation_info.response_type` **must** be

>   PolicyExperiment.

Reviewer: Same re backticks as it is a symbol.

- The name inside `policy` **must not** change but the other fields can in

>   order to change the experiment being previewed.

Reviewer: Please add a "...because...".

- The system **must** set the `state` to INACTIVE if the `state` was ACTIVE at
  the time of an update.
  - This is so the user can easily distinguish between different versions of

>     the experiment being previewed.

Reviewer: If there are many experiments, I don't see how this would accomplish this intent.

#### get
- The standard method, [Get][aip-131], **must** be included for PolicyExperiment
  resource types.

#### list

- The standard method, [List][aip-132], **must** be included for
  PolicyExperiment resource types.
- Filtering on `PreviewMetadata` indicates which experiments are actively

>   previewed.

Reviewer: I think the filtering needs to be explained with an example. What would the string contents of the field, `filter` on the list request message be? For presence? For absence? Can you filter on a specific field in the metadata, like started after?

#### delete

- The resource **must** be deleted using long-running 
  [Delete][aip-135-long-running] and 
  `google.longrunning.operation_info.response_type` **must** be
  PolicyExperiment.

#### preview

```proto
// Starts previewing a PolicyExperiment. This triggers the system to start
// generating logs to evaluate the PolicyExperiment.

> rpc PreviewPolicyExperiment(PreviewPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {

Reviewer: Consider dropping "returns (...)" to a new line. This is what the proto formatter does.

  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:preview"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "PolicyExperiment"
    metadata_type: "PreviewPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

> message PreviewPolicyExperimentRequest {

Reviewer: nit: add a message comment, even if it just says, "The request message for the preview custom method."

  // The name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
}

> message PreviewPolicyExperimentMetadata {}

Reviewer: Add a comment above. I assume this can contain anything? Does it have to be empty. Please specify.

```

- This custom method is required.
- This method **must** trigger the system to start generating logs to preview 
  the experiment.
- When the method is called, the system **must** set values for the
  `log_prefix`, and `start_time` in `PreviewMetadata` and set the state to
  `ACTIVE`.
- If the method is called on an experiment with the rules representing a no-op,

>   then the system **must** preview the deletion of the live policy.

Reviewer: It **must** also set the `log_prefix` correct? Add that as a bullet point?

#### stop

```proto
// Stops previewing a PolicyExperiment. This triggers the system to stop
// generating logs to evaluate the PolicyExperiment.
rpc StopPolicyExperiment(StopPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:stop"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "PolicyExperiment"
    metadata_type: "StopPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

> message StopPolicyExperimentRequest {

Reviewer: Please add a emssage comment.

  // The name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
}

> message StopPolicyExperimentMetadata {}

Reviewer: Please add a message comment, and, like above, explain what the compostion of this message can/should be.

```

- This custom method is required.
- This method **must** trigger the system to stop generating logs to preview the
  experiment.

> - When the method is called, the `state` **must** be set to `INACTIVE` and

Reviewer: Make two bullets, one for state and one for stop_time.

  `stop_time` **must** be set to the current time.

#### commit

The resource **may** expose a new custom method called "commit" to promote an
experiment. The system copies `policy` from the experiment into the live policy
and then deletes the experiment.

Declarative clients **may** manually copy fields from an experiment into the
live policy and then delete the experiment rather than calling "commit" if

> preferrable.

Reviewer: How does this work if not done transactionally? You will have two resources with the same value for `name` between requests no? Will this cause the server to return `CONFLICT`?

```proto
// Commits a PolicyExperiment. This copies the PolicyExperiment's policy message
// to the live policy then deletes the PolicyExperiment.
rpc CommitPolicyExperiment(CommitPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:commit"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "google.protobuf.Empty"
    metadata_type: "CommitPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

> message CommitPolicyExperimentRequest {

Reviewer: Comment.

  string name = 1;
  string etag = 2;
  string parent_etag = 3;
}

> message CommitPolicyExperimentMetadata {}

Reviewer: Comment, explain.

```

- The method **must** atomically copy `policy` from the experiment into the live
  policy, and then delete the experiment.
- If any experiment fails "commit", previewing it **must not** stop, and the
  live policy **must not** be updated.
- The method can be called on an experiment in any state.

> - The `etag` **must** match that of the experiment in order for commit to be

Reviewer: What if no etag is provided? Should the request go through?

  successful. This is so the user does not commit an unintended version of the
  experiment.
  - A `parent_etag` **may** be provided to guarantee that the experiment
  overwrites a specific version of the live policy.
- The method is not idempotent and calling it twice on the same experiment 
  **must** return a 404 NOT_FOUND as the experiment is deleted as part of the
  first call.

> ### Live policy API changes

Reviewer: What doe this header mean? Changes to what? Do you mean to explain how "delete" differs from the standard method, Delete? If so, move above to the "delete" section. A H3 with one H4 isn't very graceful.

#### delete

- A delete of the live policy **must** delete all experiments.
- To maintain the experiments while negating the effect of the live policy, the
  live policy **must** be changed to a no-op policy instead of using this
  method.

### Logging

Logging is crucial for the user to evaluate whether an experiment should be
promoted to live.

Logs **must** have evaluation result and `etag` of the experiment and live

> policies, and the `log_prefix`. This helps the user make a decision on whether

Reviewer: Use a list,

> Logs **must** contain the results of the evaluated experiment, the `etag` associated with that experiment alongside that of the live policy, and be preceded by the value of `log_prefix`.

> policies, and the `log_prefix`. This helps the user make a decision on whether

Reviewer: What benefit does logging the etags provide?

- Simulation: Replay old production traffic on the new version of a resource and evaluate the results using logging.
- Offline-validation: Evaluate new version of a resource using a set of user-defined results like CAS/presubmit checks.

## Guidance

### Supported Use-Cases

The following use-cases are considered when making a recommendation for API best practices of preview mode:
- Resource: Each entity to be previewed is a REST resource.
- Collection: A collection of objects live on a REST resource and one or many of these can be previewed.
Each API recommended below will have a table explaining how it translates to each use-case.

### Nested Collection called Experiments

A new configuration of a policy which is to be validated using preview mode is stored in a nested collection under that policy resource.

In this AIP, we will use the example of a hypothetical policy resource called “Policy”.

- /compute/v1/locations/global/policies/{policy_id}

The experimental versions of the resource used for preview mode are stored as a nested collection underneath the policy. The resource type will follow the convention "<resource_name> + Experiment”.

> - /compute/v1/locations/global/policies/{policy_id}/policyExperiments/{policy_experiment_id}

Reviewer 5: Nested resources which repeat the parent resource name in the message should not also repeat the parent name in the collection constant and id parameter. Consider `.../experiments/{experiment_id}` as the collection and parameter of the PolicyExperiment.

Policy
.../policies/{policy_id}

PolicyExperiment
.../policies/{policy_id}/experiments/{experiment_id}

Same rules that apply to {Resource}Revision, really.

Book
.../books/{book_id}

BookRevision
.../books/{book_id}/revisions/{revision_id}

Author: @toumorokoshi and I aligned on this being standard to have the name of the collection be equal to the name of the resource type. Can you two resolve this and come up with an answer?

Author: I have changed this to experiments now to align with the new guidance.

- A product **may** support multiple new configurations concurrently in preview mode for a singular parent policy. This is represented using two or more resources in the nested collection.
  - The number of configurations in preview mode for a given parent **may** be capped at a certain number.
  - 403 **may** be returned if the number of supported actively previewed policies for a given parent are exceeded.
- All resources under the experiments collection **must** be cascade-deleted if the top-level resource is deleted.
- The etag on the Policy Experiment **should** guidance on Resource freshness validation ([AIP-154][aip-154]) and will be a randomly generated UUID ([AIP-148][aip-148]). The etag **should** be present in the preview logs.
  - The parent resource **should** have an etag as well.
  - Both etags **should** be present in the preview logs to uniquely identify the version of the live and preview policies. These will change when either policy configurations change.

[aip-148]: https://aip.dev/148
[aip-154]: https://aip.dev/154

### Metadata
A Metadata object is used to track all variables pertinent to a preview.
 
```proto 

> message PreviewMetadata {

Reviewer 5: Considering that PolicyExperiment is a resource --- these fields all seem consistent with state and *_time fields you would expect to find on the resource itself. Consider moving up to top-level output_only fields?

As top-level fields of experiment resource, start_time/stop_time would be consistent with other *_time fields you find in AIP-148. Along those lines, adding create_time/update_time would be something to consider including on experiment resource as well. 

And the state as the top-level seems like it would be consistent with AIP-216 field on the experiment.

Author: So...this is to bunch together fields separately for Preview vs other use-cases for PolicyExperiment. So we want this separation for our internal use-cases.

Since this is public documentation that won't be covering the other use-cases, what do you recommend is the right approach? I could go with top-level fields as the default but recommend grouping if PolicyExperiment is needed for other use-cases.

Reviewer 5: That's a good question, a few thoughts there - just because the nature of the nested preview fields (the status and method timestamps) really leave a sense this may be compacting two resources into one...

* thought one

A quick change to get those fields top-level would be to align the field names with the custom method names

startPreview -> start_preview_time
stopPreview -> stop_preview_time
enum preview_state

Of course having a prefixed status like that raises the question: what would the "Experiment" resource's { enum state } be on its own - and would the preview states just be members of that? Or are the other non-preview scenarios mutually exclusive set of states - and those may occur simultaneously?

* thought two

Another avenue that this resource-ness of preview metadata could lead you down is to think that a preview is a noun that exists under an experiment.

`policies/p-1/experiments/e-1/previews/pre-1`

A bit like the "job object" pattern in that way. You create a new experiment, then you create a new preview, and the preview's create_time is when it started. The permission to create a preview is granted to fewer people than the permission to create an experiment (same people who would have startPreview custom method access).

The preview is in state active until cancel or delete is called... You can also create several previews of the experiment without overwriting/destroying previous previews' history (assuming you cancel them, or have a duration field that's self-cancelling, rather than delete them to stop the preview)

* thought three

Keep as-is and adjust later if needed. The proposal has already been reviewed by several people, and there's no reason to block on progress a few fields.

Author: Thanks for your thoughts Lou. 

#1 leads to worse readability when extending to other use-cases IMO. The use of nested messages for each  safe rollout use-case metadata helps with separation of use-cases specific variables that we are feeling is an asset for elegance.

#2 I think this is starting to get into "too-many-resources" land but I'm open to adjusting this as suggested in #3 down the line, but not blocking for now.

```proto
rpc GetPolicyExperiment(GetPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (PolicyExperiment);
```
- Standard methods: Get ([AIP-131][aip-131]) **must** be used to get the experiment used for preview mode.

[aip-131]: https://aip.dev/131

#### list

```proto
rpc ListPolicyExperiments(ListPolicyExperimentsRequest) returns (ListPolicyExperimentsResponse);
```
- Standard methods: List ([AIP-132][aip-132]) **should** be used to list experiments for preview mode.
- List **should** support Filtering ([AIP-160][aip-160]) semantics.
- Filtering on PreviewMetadata.state **should** indicate which experiments are actively being previewed or not.

[aip-132]: https://aip.dev/132
[aip-160]: https://aip.dev/160

#### delete

```proto
rpc DeletePolicyExperiment(DeletePolicyExperimentRequest) returns (google.protobuf.Empty);
```
- Standard methods: Delete ([AIP-135][aip-135]) **must** be used to delete experiments.

[aip-135]: https://aip.dev/135

### Parent Resource API Changes

#### delete

- A delete of the top-level resource **must** delete all experiments.
- To maintain the experiments, the top-level Policy **must** be changed to a no-op Policy instead of using delete.

### Custom Method APIs

> #### startPreview

Reviewer 5: If there is one meaningful way to start an experiment, consider the shorter custom method name "start"

That also aligns the naming convention between the "start" custom method with the "start_time" output only field.

If additional ways to start an experiment come later, they may be added as an argument enum on the StartPolicyExperimentRequest message, or field on the experiment.

Author: I don't think this is the right idea as experiment can be used for other use-cases. At least for our internal use-cases.

```proto
rpc StartPreviewPolicyExperiment(StartPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (StartPreviewPolicyExperimentResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/policyExperiments/*}:startPreview"
    body: "*"
  }
}

message StartPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest {
  string name = 1;
  string etag = 2;
}

> message StartPreviewPolicyExperimentResponse {

Reviewer 5: Consider returning the PolicyExperiment (or LRO-of-PolicyExperiment) for custom methods whose results are effectively described by the state of the resource --- successful is implied by non-error result, and error_message is returned by Status error object.

The only new information in the response, parent_etag, may be a good one to add as an additional  PolicyExperiment string parent_etag [output_only] field.

That would be generally useful to know - what etag the parent had when the experiment was created.

Author: Done - however, the parent etag is actually already present inside the Policy message in the PolicyExperiment so we don't need to add it again separately. There's guidance earlier on line 88 saying the parent etag must be there.

  string name = 1;
  string etag = 2;
  string parent_etag = 3;
  bool successful = 3;
  string error_message = 4;
}
```
- Admin flow API to start previewing a resource **should** be implemented.

>   - Remains declarative friendly as only an output only field is modified.

Reviewer 5: Well, that's true the method is effectively invisible to desired-state systems. But that also means it's impossible to create an experiment that will produce information.

Consider adding a `bool start_automatically` field to the experiment if you would like to enable desired-state system users to be able to add an experiment that will produce logs by virtue of deploying.

```
data google_theservice_thepolicy "existingpolicy" {
  name = "my-policy-id"
}

resource google_theservice_thepolicy_experiment "trysomething" {
  parent = data.google_theservice_thepolicy.existingpolicy.id
  name = "my-experiment-id"
  start_automatically = true
  rules = [ ... ]
}
```

Author: We decided to not support this because it gives us a cleaner ACL separation between the two operations:
1. Create a PolicyExperiment (essentially a draft)
2. Start the preview logging in the data plane (an operation which incurs additional cost for logging)
Draft is a less privileged operation and starting preview logging may be an admin-only operation.

Reviewer 5: Good point! If the custom method has specific permissions, it could be unusual and frustrating to have a different set of access checks made based on the value that certain resource fields were given.

- If startPreview is called specifically on a resource which is already being previewed, then it **should** return an error message.
- When startPreview is called, the system **should** set values for the log_name, and start_time in PreviewMetadata and set the state to ACTIVE.
- If startPreview is called on an experiment with an empty set of rules, the deletion of that resource **must** be previewed.
- startPreview is not idempotent and using it twice on the same resource **should** return an error.
- If the API has an error, no fields in PreviewMetadata **should** change.
- Etags **must** be used to guarantee resource freshness.

> #### stopPreview

Reviewer 5: Is there anything in the work "stop" does that would be outside of the definition of "cancel"? That is - regardless of what the resource it and what it is actively doing - cancel that work and become inactive...

If that's the case, the more semi-standard name "cancel" and "cancel_time" would be worth considering.

Author: I still prefer stop instead of cancel because, to me, stop implies that it can be started again whereas cancel feels more permanent and the PolicyExperiment is done-done (i.e. it cannot be started again).

```proto
rpc StopPreviewPolicyExperiment(StopPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (StopPreviewPolicyExperimentResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/policyExperiments/*}:stopPreview"
    body: "*"
  }
}

message StopPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest {
  string name = 1;
  string etag = 2;
}

> message StopPreviewPolicyExperimentResponse {

Reviewer 5: Same note as `StartPreviewPolicyExperimentResponse` message --- consider returning the PolicyExperiment as, or an LRO-of-PolicyExperiment if the stop/cancel method needs to be long-running.

Author: done

- stopPreview is not idempotent, calling stop twice on the same resource **should** return an error.
- If the API has an error, no fields in PreviewMetadata **should** change.
- Etags **must** be used to guarantee resource freshness.

#### commit

A new API called commit **may** be implemented to promote the experimental configuration of a resource to the effective version and perform necessary cleanup. It will copy the fields-under-test from the experiment into the parent and then delete the experiment.

This is a convenience API which is not declarative friendly. The alternative supported for declarative clients is to manually copy fields from an experiment onto the live policy then delete the experiment.

```proto
rpc CommitPolicyExperiment(CommitPolicyExperimentRequest) returns (CommitPolicyExperimentResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/policyExperiments/*}:commit"
    body: "*"
  }
}

message CommitPolicyExperimentRequest {
  string name = 1;
  string etag = 2;
  string parent_etag = 3; // optional.
}

> message CommitPolicyExperimentResponse {

Reviewer 5: Same note as StartPreviewPolicyExperimentResponse message --- consider returning the PolicyExperiment as, or an LRO-of-PolicyExperiment if the stop/cancel method needs to be long-running.

Also consider adding a `commit_time` to the experiment resource. That would complete the pairing between of standard+custom methods and the resource timestamps, e.g.

create_time
update_time
start_time
cancel_time
commit_time

(or whatever the custom methods are named)

Author: Updated the return value but want to still push back on delete_automatically as it defeats the purpose IMO

  string parent_etag = 1;
  bool successful = 2;
  string error_message = 3;
}
```

> - Commit **must** atomically copy the fields-under-test from the experiment into the live policy then deletes the experiment.

Reviewer 5: Deleting the resource as part of a successful commit call actually might be a little astonishing... Though I do understand the interest in having resources that can clean up after themselves when their job is finished...

Similar to above - would it be possible to consider two booleans that opt-in to the more automatic state changes the experiment is capable of?

`start_automatically: true` means to implicitly call `start` method after the experiment is create'ed or update'ed

`delete_automatically: true` means to implicitly call `delete` method after the experiment is cancel'ed or commit'ed

Author: I get the feeling that delete_automatically (which will be false by default) takes away the convenience of the method so I don't like the default behavior of delete_automatically being false.

(start_automatically has been addressed above)

Reviewer 5: Fair point - it's just one of many ways that "hands-free" usage could be accomplished - and like you say those details can come later as long as the current design isn't painting into a corner in some way.

---
id: 236
state: approved
created: 2022-03-05
updated: 2022-03-05
placement:
  category: resource-design

>   order: 0

Author: Not sure what the value of this should be....

Author: @toumorokoshi @loudej @shwoodard do you know

Reviewer 2: I'd leave it as zero for now. we can adjust if we find it's in the wrong position.

Reviewer: @noahdietz can you remember? I figured it out at one point and then forgot.

Reviewer: @nitinapi, just make it 240.

---
id: 236
state: approved
created: 2023-03-05
updated: 2023-03-05
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 0
---

> # Policy Preview

Reviewer: Even h1 are sentence case,

# Policy preview

This AIP provides guidance for a rollout safety mechanism to help customers
safely make changes to their resources.

Changes to Policy configurations without proper validation may have unintended
consequences which severely impact a customer’s overall infrastructure setup.

Previews are a rollout safety mechanism for Policy resources which gives the
customer the ability to validate the effect of their proposed changes against
live production traffic prior to the changes going live.

## Guidance

### System changes

The API logic of this mechanism pushes an “experimental” version of a proposed
change to the upstream system (data plane) while the existing “effective”
version remains active. Both versions of the configuration are subsequently

> evaluated for incoming traffic, however, only the effective version’s

Reviewer: One comma, "...incoming traffic, however only..."

configurations actually have the ability to alter traffic. Meanwhile, the
output of the experimental version is logged so a customer can validate that
the proposed changes are as intended. This gives the customer the ability to
fully understand the effects of the new configuration against live traffic
before replacing the effective configuration with it.

### Non-goals

#### Non-policy resources

This rollout safety mechanism is for policies only.  

A Policy is a customer-owned resource with a set of rules that govern the
behavior of how other resources admit or deny a target entity (e.g. network

> traffic for firewall rules, general cloud resources with Org Policy). Generally,

Reviewer: "general cloud resource with Org Policy" is Google Cloud specific and these are general AIPs. Can you think of another example?

the outcome of a Policy can be evaluated to a specific set of outcomes. For
example, a FirewallPolicy evaluates to either ALLOW or DENY for incoming traffic
into a Virtual Network. This lends well to preview mode as a rollout safety
mechanism as the proposed changes to a Policy can simply be logged instead of
enforced.

### Supported use-cases

The following use-cases are considered when making a recommendation for API best
practices of preview mode:
- Resource: Each entity to be previewed is a gRPC resource.
- Collection: A collection of objects live on a REST resource and one or many of

> these can be previewed.

Reviewer: Resources are resources. They are both for REST (JSON over http) APIs and gRPC (proto-based) APIs. I don't understand what you're driving at here.

> Each API recommended below will have a table explaining how it translates to

Reviewer: I don't see any tables below. Did you mean to add them or remove this?

> each use-case.

Reviewer: I feel that this section is unnecessary and confusing. I don't think it adds a lot of value as the rules for resources and collections are spelled out below. I would remove it entirely.

### Nested collection called experiments

A new configuration of a Policy which is to be validated using preview mode is

> stored in a nested collection under that Policy resource.

Reviewer: nit: "as a nested collection" reads better than "in a nested collection".

In this AIP, we will use the example of a hypothetical Policy resource called,
`Policy`.

> `/projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}`

Reviewer: Remove the leading slash and clarify that this is the pattern for the resource name.

The experimental versions of the resource used for preview mode are stored as a
nested collection under `Policy`. The resource type will follow the convention
"<resource_name> + Experiment”.

`/projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}/experiments/{experiment}`

A proto used to represent an experiment **must** contain the following fields:

  1. The required top-level fields for a resource, like `name` and `etag`.

>   2. The `Policy` that is being tested itself.

Reviewer: In this case, "Policy" is not a symbol but a term. Remove backticks.

>   3. The `metadata` field for preview.

Reviewer: According to the proto example below, the field is `preview_metadata`. Please fix.

```proto
message PolicyExperiment {

  // The name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
 
  // The eTag of the PolicyExperiment.
  string etag = 2;

  // The fields used for log evaluation and eventual promotion.
  Policy policy = 3;

  // Metadata for preview mode only.
  PreviewMetadata preview_metadata = 4 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];
}
```
- A new proto **must** be used for experiments with the Policy proto inlined
  inside.

>   - The inlined Policy field contains any changes to the parent resource which

Reviewer: nit: s/which/that/

    are to be tested using preview mode.
- The name inside the embedded Policy message **must** be the name of the parent. 
- When the user is ready to promote an experiment, the Policy message field
  **must** be copied into the live resource and the experiment is deleted.
  This can be done manually or via a custom method for commit described below.
- A product **may** support multiple new configurations concurrently in preview
  for a singular parent Policy. This is represented using two or more resources
  in the nested collection.
  - The number of configurations in preview for a given parent **may** be capped
    at a certain number.
- Cascading deletes **must** occur: if the top-level resource is deleted, all
  resources underlying any experiments must also be deleted.

> - The etag on the experiment **must** guidance on the resource freshness

Reviewer: This sentence is missing a word or something. I don't follow.

>   validation ([AIP-154][aip-154]) and will be a randomly generated UUID

Reviewer: Remove, "and will be a randomly generated UUID". We do not require this.

  ([AIP-148][aip-148]). The etag **must** be present in the preview logs.

>   - The parent resource **must** have an `etag` as well.

Reviewer: Remove "an" or backticks. If "an" is there, you're talking about it as a term, if backticks are there, you're referring to it as symbol, i.e. the field name.

  - Both etags **must** be present in the preview logs to uniquely identify the
    version of the live and experimental policies. These will change when either
    Policy configurations change.

### Metadata

> A `metadata` field is used to track all variables pertinent to a preview.

Reviewer: `preveiw_metadata` or remove backticks.

 
```proto 
message PreviewMetadata {
  // State of the previewed resource. Possible values are ACTIVE and INACTIVE, the 
  // former which indicates that results are being logged downstream.
  string state = 1;

  // Ifentifying string common to all preview mode logs for the product. Searching 
  // logs for this string will isolate all logs pertaining to this preview.
  string log_prefix = 2;

  // The start time of the current preview.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp start_time = 3;

  // The latest stop time of the preview.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp stop_time = 4;
}
```
- `PreviewMetadata` **must** have the fields defined in the proto above and
  **must** use the same set of values for state.
- A shared proto used across services **must not** be used ([AIP-213][aip-213]).

> - When a preview is first started, preview_metadata **must** be empty. It will

Reviewer: Backticks for `preview_metadata`.

  only be present on experiments once a custom method has been used to start it.
- All preview metadata fields **must** be output only.
- The state field **must** only be updated by the service:
  - The state **must** subsequently be altered between ACTIVE and INACTIVE to
    start or stop downstream evaluation using custom methods described below.
- The first time the startPreview custom method is used, the service **must**
  create the `PreviewMetadata` and do the following: 
  - It **must** set the `state` to ACTIVE
  - It **must** set a `log_prefix` which is common to all preview mode logs for
    the product.
  - It **must** populate the `start_time` with the current time. 
- When the stopPreview custom method is used, the service **must** do the
  following:
  - It **must** set the `state` to INACTIVE
  - It **must** populate the `stop_time` with the current time. 
- `start_time` **must** be updated every time the status is changed to ACTIVE.

### Collection extensibility

> For the collection use-case, Rule is a repeated field on a Policy resource as

Reviewer: I don't think "use case" is hyphenated. Please update throughout.

shown below.

```proto
message Policy {

  string name = 1;

  repeated Rule rules = 2;

  // Other existing fields…
}
```

> An experiment is created for the entire parent resource. So essentially, there

Reviewer: When you say, "parent resource", do you mean "live policy"? If so, I think we should consider using this throughout as it is more descriptive and accurate than "parent resource".

> will be a experiment with its own set of rules. The following guidelines

Reviewer: "...an experiment..."

> will be a experiment with its own set of rules. The following guidelines

Reviewer: You say, "The following guidelines...". Which are you referring to? After this sentence there is no colon. You go directly into examples and not "guidelines". I find this confusing.

**must** be used to determine how to author an experiment when `rules` is a
repeated field.

To show the changes between a live resource and its experiment, the following
example will be used:
A live resource has `rules`: [rule1, rule2]

Each example below will show the value of the `rules` in the experiment, and the
intended result.

Create rule3 in preview mode:
`rules`: [rule1, rule2, rule3]

Preview the deletion of rule 2:
`rules`: [rule1]

Update rule2 to rule2’:
`rules`: [rule1, rule2’]

### APIs

Experiments **must** follow resource-oriented design as stated in
([AIP-121][aip-121]). Additionally, the following guidance **must** be followed

> which is specific to Experiments:

Reviewer: Debatable whether "Experiments" should be capitalized and throughout.

Logging is crucial for the user to evaluate whether an experiment should be
promoted to live.

Logs **must** contain the results of the evaluated experiment, the `etag`
associated with that experiment alongside that of the live policy, and be
preceded by the value of `log_prefix`.
  - The `etag` fields help the user identify which
    configurations of the live and experiment are evaluated in the log.
  - `log_prefix` helps the user separate logs specifically generated for 
    previewing the experiment from other use cases.

> Overall, these logs help the user make a decision on whether to promote the

Reviewer: s/decision on/decision about/
